---
layout: post
title:  "STAT 585X - Reproducible Research"
date:   2014-02-02 2:06:11
categories: blog
---

(This is a blog post made for the fourth reading assignment in STAT 585X.

In "Statistical Analyses and Reproducible Research" by Robert Gentleman and Duncan Lang, a "compendium" is described. A compendium is a distributable unit which contains text, data, and software, which can then be transformed into a static document such as a PDF. This overcomes the limitations of traditional static papers as well as standalone computer functions. These dynamic documents contain both text chunks and code chunks. The benefits of this approach are numerous. For instance, the authors describe how tables and figures can be automatically regenerated in the output document when inputs are modified.

The discussion then turns to reproducible research. By supplying a dynamic document, the full methodology that went into the creation of a static paper can be analyzed; code chunks are visible, and the results can be modified and rebuilt on the fly. Another interesting benefit to this approach is that even if the document contains a lot of detail about the subject, different parts of that detail need not be displayed in the output document to audiences that wouldn't be interested.

In my time at Iowa State, I've utilized several of these concepts. Using the R package knitr, which is an evolution of the Sweave environment discussed in this paper, I've written and collaborated on several dynamic documents. In the election paper written by Andee Kaplan and I, the analysis is dynamically generated upon compilation of the document. Prior to the election, this would mean that our results would automatically update upon the release of new polls or spending figures. As a side benefit, the methodology we used is publicly visible and available for scrutiny.
