---
layout: post
title:  "STAT 585X - Split-Apply-Combine"
date:   2014-01-18 13:05:31
categories: blog
---

(This is a blog post made for the first reading assignment in STAT 585X, in reference to http://www.jstatsoft.org/v40/i01/paper)

{% highlight r %}
library(plyr)
{% endhighlight %}

In this paper, Hadley describes an approach for working with data called "Split-Apply-Combine", which is implemented in his plyr package. The general approach is to split a large problem into more manageable sub-problems, apply some function to the sub-problems, and then combine the individual pieces together. Hadley importantly notes that an alternative to loops in R is not necessary simply because loops are slower, but because loops are more cumbersome and involve more "book-keeping" than a simple approach using plyr. Hadley details how code can be simplified using functions in plyr. The functions are named according to xyply, where x is either a, d, or l depending on whether the input data is an array, data frame, or list, and y is also a, d, or l according to what the user wants as the data format returned. After describing these functions in more detail, Hadley proceeds to use the baseball and ozone data sets as case studies.

Ultimately, the split-apply-combine approach works well in practice, and is also rather intuitive. As implemented in plyr, this allows statisticians to perform transformations, find summaries, and compute statistics on large datasets without worrying about loops. This allows data analysts to focus on doing what they do best.

