---
layout: post
title:  "STAT 585X - Tidy"
date:   2014-03-02 1:01:14
categories: blog
---

(This is a blog post made for the seventh reading assignment in STAT 585X.)

This paper by Hadley Wickham investigates methods for efficient tidying of data. Hadley begins by explaining the typical structure of a statistical dataset, which consists of rows and columns in which columns are named and rows are sometimes named. Hadley then defines tidy data as a dataset which meets the following criteria:

* Each variable forms a column.
* Each observation forms a row.
* Each type of observational unit forms a table.

From there, Hadley goes on to explain methods for making data into a tidy format. A common "messy" format is one in which columns represent values (e.g., income levels or equally spaced time intervals). A format like this can be melted into long-form, adding a single "variable" column which contains the values as given in the old column headers. This way, each row becomes a single observation. A more complicated situation arises when there are variables stored in columns and rows, in which case a two-stage approach (melt then tidy) sometimes must be employed.

After discussing how to tidy data, Hadley then explains what can be done with tidy data. Examples are given illustrating the easy of data manipulation, modeling, and graphical summaries with a dataset in tidy format. A case study is provided to illustrate all the concepts.

Ultimately, as Hadley states, data cleaning is both immensely important and yet frequently overlooked. There also is an interesting problem in that this data format is considered tidy precisely because the current tools available are partciularly suited to this format. But as the structures change and evolve, its possible other formats of Tidy data may be preferable. Until then, these strategies presented are going to remain particularly effective for data analysis purposes.
