---
layout: post
title:  "STAT 585X - dplyr"
date:   2014-02-16 12:04:55
categories: blog
---

(This is a blog post made for the fifth reading assignment in STAT 585X.

{% highlight r %}
library(dplyr)
{% endhighlight %}

dplyr is a new R package written by Hadley Wickham which makes manipulating, summarising, and rearranging data easier. It is somewhat of a next-generation version of plyr.

There are five primary functions, or "verbs", which perform operations on a data frame. The first is filter(), which allows the selection of a subset of the rows of a data frame according to the conditions specified. It works similarly to subset(). The second is arrange, which reorders the rows according to the variable specified in ascending or descending order. select() works like a database select operation, choosing which columns to include and exclude. mutate() adds new columns to the data frame which are functions of existing columns. Finally, summarise() collapses the data frame into a single row based on the summary statistic provided.

Grouped operations are another feature of dplyr. Using the group_by() function, variables by which to aggregate the results can be provided. When the input is grouped, the above "verbs" will operate on groups of rows at a time. Finally, all these operations can be changed together (similar to a ggplot statement) using the %.% operator, allowing for these to be done in a single statement.

Lastly, dplyr supports open source databases sqlite, mysql, and postgresql for data that does not fit into memory. You need only provide the path to the database. It can even be created directly from the src_sqlite() function. This allows the flexibility for working with datasets that cannot simply be loaded into memory in one go.
